Last week was when I realized I hit peak head explosion. 

So, what's the difference between a friend posting about penis pills (which is obviously fake) to a friend posting about voter fraud 


======
Hey! What do you think about the rise/adoption of fake news and what journalists (and/or ProPublica) can do to combat it? I've been fascinated by this subject for a few months now and realize you're the best person I could possible talk to about it. In particular, these Planet Money and Diane Rehm podcast episodes both hit home about how difficult a problem this has become. http://www.npr.org/sections/money/2016/12/02/504155809/episode-739-finding-the-fake-news-king

======

Oh man, me too. 
It's terrible. I think that there's very little that real news organizations can do to directly combat fake news. We're outgunned by the speed of fake news, since it requires no reporting or fact checking. Debunking requires both, if it's to be credible. 
I think as news organizations, our best individual action is to make real progress on improving real news for modern digital audiences. Which, to me, means engaging audiences in the newsgathering process, bolstering local coverage so that national stories reflect more diverse experiences and resonate with audiences as well as / better than fake news does. 
But I actually think this problem requires a different response. Business issues seem to be one of the main reasons for the spread of this problem. If you eliminate the financial incentives /opportunities, you would eliminate the commercially motivated purveyors of fake news. That would leave plenty of propagandistic stuff, but that stuff Would have less cover for itself. 
The online ad market is a huge part of the problem, too, and I have been arguing for a long time that Google and ad networks need to get serious about cleaning up their industry. There's potentially more market incentives to do so than before, given market perspiration. Endless inventory drives rates down, but also dulls ad effectiveness for reputable advertisers. So, agencies, networks and brands could play a major role, refusing to work with networks that don't vet sites. Google has made some effort to address this, and that is a good sign -- they're the most common open-to-all platform in the market, after all. But they also make huge revenues (taken largely from real news publishers!) from them is huge shadowy market, so acting aggressively, alone, would be deeply damaging to their business. So, the problem is not going to be eliminated quickly. 
If I had my way, I'd say publishers could do a couple things to help, though neither will happen: (1) eliminate all native advertising from real news sites, which is essentially a kind of corporate propaganda and erodes the trust and standards expected of real news. (2) develop our own ad network stack for vetted publishers, which participants commit to using exclusively. Win clients by providing a range of competitively priced ad products, preferred pricing for advertisers and agencies who sign exclusive contracts, and deliver more value to advertisers with higher quality metrics. Get major brand advertisers on board, but don't build it as premium and aimed only at capturing more value for publishers -- build it as better for the buyer. The idea of a publisher run network has proved elusive and easily corrupted in the past, I realize, but I still think someone could do it right and succeed.
I also think advertising is a terrible business model for online news, in general, but if we're going to keep doing it, we should at least try to make it not suck, and to try and starve the garbage sites on the internet!
I also think Facebook should do something to suppress fake news, but I think there are real challenges there, as well. My current preferred solution would be user flagging, with weighted impact of users based on past reliability, with fake content subject to removal -- and you get a notification if you shared, liked, or commented on something that later is flagged as fake. UX would be difficult to not alienate users, but it's not impossible. 
I am not sure how much any of this would help, but that's where my head's at.
You have ideas?

======

Hey! Sorry for not responding sooner to your amazing reply. I agree that it's terrible and I have no good solutions to offer. I've certainly seen a few proposed, but none deal with how to handle the influx of fake news volume over actual journalism. I've been trying to think of an analogous problem in a different field, and the closest I can come up with is spam and email. Have a sort of meta-news outlet that builds a brand of only promoting properly vetted news stories, while maintaining a publicly-viewable source of fake news. For example: What makes me trust Gmail's ability to keep spam out of my inbox while keeping emails I care about out of my spam filter is that I get to look in my spam folder and verify that what's in there is crap. If there was a news outlet that let me verify through comparison the stories they're choosing to promote, then I could start to build trust in that website's ability to be a reliable source of actual news.

Now, while this potentially sounds like a good fix for both quickly debunking fake news as well as dealing with the influx of fake news volume, I have no idea how to actually implement this. Spam filters work algorithmically + whatever magic email service providers toss in there. Doing that strategy to news sounds like an incredibly interesting machining learning problem, but that's coming from a guy that knows very little about machining learning. At least there'd be a fairly large set of training data. 🙂